# 6.exercise.10.md

## Statement

A permutation is an ordered subset of a set. For example, say you wanted to
pick a combination to a vault. There are 60 possible numbers, and you need
three different numbers for the combination. There are __P(60,3)__ permutations
for the combination, where P is defined by the formula

               a!
    P(a,b) = ------,
             (a-b)!

where __!__ is used as a suffix factorial operator. For example, __4!__ is
__4\*3\*2\*1__.

Combinations are similar to permutations, except that the order of the objects
doesn't matter. For example, if you were making a _"banana split"_ sundea and
wished to use three different flavors of ice cream out of five that you had,
you wouldn't care if you used a scoop of vanilla at the beginning or the end;
you would still have used vanilla. The formula for combination is

             P(a,b) 
    C(a,b) = ------.
               b!

Design a program that asks users for two numbers, asks them whether they want
to calculate permutations or combinations, and prints out the result. This will
have several parts. Do an analysis of the above requeriments. Write exactly what
the program will have to do. Then go into design phase. Write pseudo code for
the program, and break it into sub-components. This program should have error
checking. Make sure that all erroneous inputs will generate good error
messages

## Harsh thoughts

This exercise put me in the edge of depression. From previous exercises I've
developed a sensation of incompletness about some exercise solutions. It starts
with the quadratic equations solvers and culminates with this one. I've spent
too much time planning and thinking about it to, in the end, realize how far
I'm to be ready to face such an apparently simple problem. But it's not, in
fact, that simple:

-  Assure that the user has entered and integer and nothing more is much more
   than read an int from std::cin. Input parsing is a hell.
-  With int type and a multiplicative implementation of factorial we couldn't
   go beyond 12!. To implement factorial the right way we also need to
   implement a big int type (or an arbitrary precision integer, name it).  And,
   from and efficency point of view, pick an algorithm from various families
   that has nothing to do with simple multiplication.
-  Arithmetiic operations on integers could lead to overflow. And checking it
   after the operation is performed is not a good idea (learn about __undefined
   behaviour__); we must check that the operation does not overflow before
   doing it.

Of course, these are aspects that, on chapter 6, could be considered as
advanced topics. But I can't ignore them. But I will force myself to since I'm
stuck and in the need to continue. Since I spy on Bjarne's solution to the
exercise and he doesn't seem to care about what I care, I will take that he
pretends it to seem simple and reserve for later the unpleasant surprise of the
reality.

Said so, I will care about some topics trying to do the best program I can with
a measured effort. But it will not be bulletproof. The bulletproof version will
be, I guess, nearer to a thousand lines of code than to a hundred. And I don't
think the author pretends that to happen right now.

## Analysis

Mathematical notation tends to use n and k rather than a and b for set and
subset cardinalities, respectively. Permutations as defined by the statement
are a k-permutations of n, partial permutations or sequences without repetition
(see <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Permutation>). Combinations are
k-combinations of (a given set S of) n elements.  Both of them are __without
repetition__.

### About inputs

Let's consider finite sets and, thus, subsets. So n and k must be integers
and positives (natural numbers). And since we have no repetition, k must be
equal or less than n.

Does it makes sense for n or k to be 0? A bit of _googling_ let me believe so,
and the definition of 0! as 1 simplifies the case. If we have an empty set,
in how many ways can do count nothing? Mathematicians answer to this is 1. The
formula P(0,0) supports this. If we have a non empty set, but we take empty
subsets P(n,0) is 1 again as there is only one way to take 0 elements from a
set. For me, it makes sense.

So input must fulfill these conditions:
 
    n is an integer so that n >= 0
    k is an integer so taht k >= 0
    n >= k

### Use cases

The user is asked to enter two natural numbers and one of two functions. Once
the function result is given, the user has the possibility to perform another
calculation or exit the program. The main use case could be seen as:

    Set cardinality?
    6
    Subset cardinality?
    3
    Function (c/C for combination, p/P for permutation)?
    p
    P(6,3) equals 120
    Do you want to perform another operation? (y/n)

We have restrictions on inputs, of course, that we must check and report errors
as we found them. An error on an user input will cause the program to report and
ask again for the same input.

Also, before restrictions are checked, the user could enter something that's
not an integer. The program must handle, to an extent, these wrong inputs. An
example if this is the input of a floating point number, that causes a correct
read of an integer number but ignores the decimal or the scientific notation
part leaving them untouched for the next, and perhaps surprising, cin reading.

Also, we must check possible errors on permutation and combination calculation.
These errors are mainly related to integer type overflow. But this is more of
a design matter.

## Design

### Main loop pseudocode

The main body of the program will go on a loop until user asks for quitting:

    while there isinput and user wants to continue 
        set_cardinality = get_natural()
        subset_cardinality = get_natural()
        operation = get_function()
        switch (operation)
            case 'p':
            case 'P':
                print result of permutation(set_cardinality, subset_cardinality)
            case 'c':
            case 'C':
                print result of combination(set_cardinality, subset_cardinality)
        does the user want to continue?

As set and subset cardinality inputs share the restriction to be positive but
also have a relationship restriction, we choose to apply the first on a common
function get\_natural() and consider the later as an error inside permutation
and combination functions. It's a desgin decision; we could also create a
function to get each input or, doing so, create a third one to put the first
restriction in its own. Also the second restriction could be refined outside
the calculation functions and don't consider it an error but a condition to
ask the user for inputs again.

Each of get\_ functions will print their messages and check the type correctness
of the input they received.

### Factorial

Formulas on the statement do heavy use of factorial operator. As implemented in
[6.exercise.03.cpp](https://gitlab.com/0p3r4t4/PPPUCPP2nd/blob/master/ch06/6.exercise.03.cpp)
or as the classic example of recursion, factorial raises a problem as it grows
very rapidly. So fast, in fact, that with an int type we can't calculate
factorial beyond 12!. And what is worse, with the standard longer int type we
can not get beyond 20!. This implies that with the mentioned implementations we
can not even resolve the P(60,3) for the statement example.

While those implementations are discouraged by their limitations, there are, of
course, more [advanced
implementations](http://www.luschny.de/math/factorial/FastFactorialFunctions.htm)
that allow to calculate factorial of large numbers, exactly or approximately
(as [Stirling's
approximation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stirling%27s_approximation>)), 
with varying levels of range and effeciency. But such advanced implementations
require knowledge we _currently ignore_.

It's suspicious, though, that some of them rely on prime factorization and
hence [need the support of a prime sieve (a good implementation of the sieve of
Eratosthenes will do)](http://www.luschny.de/math/factorial/conclusions.html),
and we have already implemented (perhaps not good enough) the sieve of
Eratosthenes in [exercise 13 from chapter
4](https://gitlab.com/0p3r4t4/PPPUCPP2nd/blob/master/ch04/4.exercise.13.cpp). I
actually expect that, later on the book, these things that my mind revolves
about will be uncovered in a rather painful way.

So I ask myself; do we really need factorial to resolve this exercise?

### Permutation

Factorial formulation of permutation is a nifty way of expressing it. However
is computationally unfeasible. Take the statement example, P(60,3):

                 60!      60 * 59 * 58 * 57!
    P(60,3) = --------- = ------------------ = 60 * 59 * 58
              (60 - 3)!          57!

The denominator is there only to perform a cancellation on the numerator. In
fact, other way to formulate the permutation is the product of i with i from n
to n-k+1. Let's express this formula as PROD(i, n, n-k+1).

The slight advantage of this formulation is that 60! overflows, but 60\*59\*58
does not. It's an improvement although it will also overflow with not so large
numbers (mainly with large values of k), but later than (or in less cases) than
original formula.

    int perm(int n, int k)
    {
        check n and k restrictions as a precondition

        if k or n is zero
            return 1;

        int prod = 1;

        for (int i = n-k+1; i <= n; ++i) 
            if (check_pmul(prod, i))
                prod *= i;
            else
                overflow error;

        return prod;
    }

And that's it. check_pmul() is a function to check if multiplication overflows
before actually perform it.

### Combination

It turns out that the combination we are trying to calculate is such an
important formula that has its own name: __binomial coefficient__. So I will
take the [multiplicative implementation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Binomial_coefficient#Multiplicative_formula).

    int comb(int n, int k)
    {
        check n and k restrictions as a precondition

        if k or n is zero
            return 1;

        int prod = 1;

        for (int i = i; i <= k; ++i) 
            if (check_pmul(prod, n+1-i))
                prod = (prod * (n+1-i)) / i;
            else
                overflow error;

        return prod;
    }

Its obvious that perm() and comb() implementations are very similar. It's
possible that, as our knowledge grows in time, these could be refactored in one
function (Perhaps lambdas will help?).

### Overflow detection

When we do arithmetic operations on integers, overflow (signed integers) or wrap
(unsigned integers) could happen. In some cases, there are no need to check if
it has happened but if it could happen we must actively guard against it.

As it turns, overflow (since we _don't know nothing about unsigned types_)
detection is not as easy as one might expect. Per example, previously to this
exercise, we have considered that if we add or multiply two positive integers
and the result is negative then the operation has overflowed. This is a flawed
consideration since C++ standard says that signed integer overflow results in
[undefined behavior](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Undefined_behavior). So
testing for the result to be negative is not reliable since it's done in an
undefined behavior scenario.

We are strictly working with multiplication of positive integers. A partial
implementation of a solution provided in [www.securecoding.cert.org - INT32-C](https://www.securecoding.cert.org/confluence/display/c/INT32-C.+Ensure+that+operations+on+signed+integers+do+not+result+in+overflow).

    bool check_pmul(int a, int b)
    {
        if ( a > (numeric_limits<int>::max() / b) )
            return false;

        return true;
    }

Simple enough for the current problem.

### User inputs

We considered that user inputs are obtained through two functions. In these
functions we try to get a correct input by asking the user until his
capitulation.

#### Cardinalities

This is bizarre, but I have moved the question to the user inside the function
to simplify the main body.

    int get_natural(const string& msg)
    {
        int n = 0;
        
        for (;;) {
            cout << msg;
            cin >> n;
            if (cin) {
                cin.ignore(numeric_limits<streamsize>::max(), '\n');
                if (n < 0)
                    cout << n << " is not a positive integer.\n";
                else
                    return n;
            }
            else if (!cin.eof()) {
                cout << "Your input is not a number.\n";
                cin.clear();
                cin.ignore(numeric_limits<streamsize>::max(), '\n');
            }
            else {
                error("get_natural(): " + err_msg_eoi);
            }
        }
    }

Whether cin read is successful or not we ignore the rest of the line for it not
to be carried to following reads. EOI is considered an unrecoverable error.

#### Options

Mimicking the previous one, we get an option from distinct sets of valid
ones from a single function. This time we predefine those sets as vectors and
use a function that checks if the option provided by the user belongs to the
set.

    char get_option(const string& msg, const vector<char> v)
    {
        char c = 0;
        for (;;) {
            cout << msg;
            cin >> c;
            if (cin) {
                cin.ignore(numeric_limits<streamsize>::max(), '\n');
                if (is_in(c, v))
                    return c;
                else
                    cout << c << " is not a valid option.\n";
            }
            else {
                error("get_option(): " + err_msg_eoi);
            }
        }
    }

is\_in() simply traverse the vector v searching for value c. A ranged for will
do it.
