# 6.exercise.05.md

## Statement

Add the article __the__ to the "English" grammar in 6.4.1, so that it can
describe sentences such as "The birds fly but the fish swim"

The referenced English grammar is:

    Sentence:
        Noun Verb
        Sentence Conjunction Sentence
    Conjunction:
        "and"
        "or"
        "but"
    Noun:
        "birds"
        "fish"
        "C++"
    Verb:
        "rules"
        "fly"
        "swim"

## The very lazy solution

The very lazy solution is:

    Sentence:
        "the" Noun Verb
        Sentence Conjunction Sentence

I won't develop it further; it's inflexible and avoids to describe sentences as
previously defined (only those with "the" before each noun are recognized).

## The more developed, but still somewaht lazy, solution

We don't intend to perform a complete English grammar, but we can investigate a
bit to develop a grammar with extensibility potential (I'm not English native
so forgive my lack of knowledge).

    Sentece:
        Subject Verb
        Sentence Conjunction Sentence
    Subject:
        NounPhrase
        Noun
    NounPhrase:
        Determiner Noun
    Determiner:
        "the"
    Conjunction:
        "and"
        "or"
        "but"
    Noun:
        "birds"
        "fish"
        "C++"
    Verb:
        "rules"
        "fly"
        "swim"

Perhaps we can avoid the _NounPhrase_ rule by defining _Subject_ as:

    Subject:
        Determiner Noun
        Noun

but I like to make explicit the _noun phrase_ concept.

Pros:

1.  The grammar can describe the new sentences while being capable of
    describing the original ones. But see Cons#1. 

2.  We left open the possiblity to develop the Determiner rule and add a new
    level to differentiate articles (definite and indefinite), demonstratives,
    possesives and quantifiers.

Cons:

1.  The grammar also describes sentences with only one article as 
    "__the__ birds fly but fish swim".

2.  We don't consider the nesting of noun phrases.

3.  Potential to extensibility could be not so easy to achieve as English
    grammar is complex.

## The uppercase doubt

The statement of the exercise says to describe sentences as "__T__he birds
...", with the first letter a capital one. Is the grammar the right place to
deal with that?

I don't think so, since it's an orthography problem and I would treat it
outside the grammar.
