# 10.exercise.06.md

## Statement

Define a **Roman\_int** class for holding Roman numerals (as **int**s) with a
**<<** and **>>**. Provide **Roman\_int** with an **as\_int()** member that
returns the **int** value, so that if **r** is a **Roman\_int**, we can write
**cout << "Roman " << r << " equals " << r.as\_int() << '\n';**.

## Analysis

### Roman numerals

We were told that Roman numerals are expressed by a set of letters with
different values: M, D, C, L, X, V, and I, respectively equivalents to 1000,
500, 100, 50, 10, 5 and 1. The awkwardness comes when we were told that, to
express 900, we must write CM, kind of 100 substracted from 1000.

For this exercise I prefer to take a different approach where the letters
aren't the core concept but _particles_. I call _particles_ to the letters or
combinations of them that have a defined value. The particles are (read below
for explanation about particles properties):

| Particle | Value | Repetition | Conflicts with | Inhibits |
| -------- |:-----:|:----------:|:--------------:|:--------:|
|    M     | 1000  |    4       | -              |   -      |
|    CM    | 900   |    1       | D, CD          |   C      |
|    D     | 500   |    1       | CM, CD         |   -      |
|    CD    | 400   |    1       | CM, D          |   C      |
|    C     | 100   |    4       | -              |   -      |
|    XC    | 90    |    1       | L, XL          |   X      |
|    L     | 50    |    1       | XC, XL         |   -      |
|    XL    | 40    |    1       | XC, L          |   X      |
|    X     | 10    |    4       | -              |   -      |
|    IX    | 9     |    1       | V, IV          |   I      |
|    V     | 5     |    1       | IX, IV         |   -      |
|    IV    | 4     |    1       | IX, V          |   I      |
|    I     | 1     |    4       | -              |   -      |

These particles could appear or not, and some of them could be consecutively
repeated. There is some discussion about if these particles could be repeated 3
or 4 times, so both IV and IIII means 4. Since it barely affects my analysis I
will take the _4-repetition_ option. With this decision the numbers we can
represent range from 1 to 49999 (remember that Roman numerals have no concept
of zero).

The advantage of _particles_ is that they appear in order of decreasing
magnitude, so we could parse a Roman numeral by simply traversing the
_particles_ from the greatest to the lowest.

There are some particles that conflict with others. In sets ***{CM, D, CD}***,
***{XC, L, XL}*** and ***{IX, V, IV}***, only one _particle_ from the set could
appear in the Roman numeral. Explanation: once CM (900) appears, there is no
interest in adding D (500) or CD (400).

There are some _particles_ that inhibit others; if CM (900) or CD (400) appear,
there is no chance for C (100) to appear after since 900+100 is 1000 and
expressed with M, and 400+100 is 500 and expressed with D.

Taking account of all this, I plan to implement a lookup table that condenses
all the information contained in the former table.

### Input behavior

I want **>>** operator to work on **Roman\_int** as similar as it does on
fundamental types. I mean, if we have an input as _3e10-0.2_ and we read two
**double**s, we obtain _3e10_ and _-0.2_.

So, if we have an input as _MMXCCV_, that at first sight seems wrong, and the
program reads two **Roman\_int**s, I want to obtain _MMX_ and _CCV_ and not an
error.  This forces me to work on the **char** level instead of working with
strings and also bind me to return to the input stream those characters that,
previously read, don't belong to the **Roman\_int** currently read.

As the book already brings up, this behavior can be difficult to obtain.

## Design

### The Lookup Table (LUT)

We could express the table about Roman numerals in analysis with code or data.
The use of a LUT (a pretty simple one, in this case) seems like a good idea to
me. You can argue that it is some kind of cheat, but the truth is that a tiny
amount of data tremendously simplifies the parse and composition of Roman
numerals, so, why not?

The LUT is composed by a series of rows, modeled with a struct:

    struct lut_row {
        string particle;
        int value;
        size_t next;
    };

With the **next** member, an index to the LUT, we express, on one step, the
_conflict with_ and _inhibition_ concepts, just by saying which particle could
appear after the current one.  If we found a **CM**, neither **D** or **CD**
(by conflict) or **C** (by inhibition) could appear after, so **next** points
to the **XC** particle as candidate.

For repetition, we could add a member to **lut\_row** or hardcode it on the
LUT. With a member we must track repetition, while parsing or composing, with a
counter. So let's be verbose. The final LUT looks like this:

| Index | Particle | Value | Next |
|:-----:|:--------:|:-----:|:----:|
|   0   |    M     |  1000 |   1  |
|   1   |    M     |  1000 |   2  |
|   2   |    M     |  1000 |   3  |
|   3   |    M     |  1000 |   4  |
|   4   |    CM    |   900 |  11  |
|   5   |    D     |   500 |   7  |
|   6   |    CD    |   400 |  11  |
|   7   |    C     |   100 |   8  |
|   8   |    C     |   100 |   9  |
|   9   |    C     |   100 |  10  |
|  10   |    C     |   100 |  11  |
|  11   |    XC    |    90 |  18  |
|  12   |    L     |    50 |  14  |
|  13   |    XL    |    40 |  18  |
|  14   |    X     |    10 |  15  |
|  15   |    X     |    10 |  16  |
|  16   |    X     |    10 |  17  |
|  17   |    X     |    10 |  18  |
|  18   |    IX    |     9 | END  |
|  19   |    V     |     5 |  21  |
|  20   |    IV    |     4 | END  |
|  21   |    I     |     1 |  22  |
|  22   |    I     |     1 |  23  |
|  23   |    I     |     1 |  24  |
|  24   |    I     |     1 | END  |

This LUT serves us for three kinds of work:

  - parsing
  - particle testing
  - composing

### Parsing a Roman numeral

Given an **istream**, parsing is done by obtaining a valid **particle** from it
and search it on the LUT, adding its **value** to a accumulator and _jumping_
to the **next** index to begin the search for the next particle obtained.
We could express this idea in pseudo code:

    accumulator = 0
    index = 0
    while index != END
        obtain particle
        index = search particle position in LUT begining at index
        add LUT[index].value to accumulator
        index = LUT[index].next
    return accumulator

that translates almost directly to C++ (see **parse\_roman()** in
_10.exercise.06.roman.cpp_)

### Obtain a particle

In the parsing of a Roman numeral we have "obtain particle" as a function.
This is the step where we get a particle from the **istream**. As previously
mentioned, this is done at the char level and we have to distinguish some
cases, given that we can have one or two char particles.

  - there's no char left in the **istream**.
  - there's only one char left in the **istream**, it can be a partice or not.
  - we can get two chars, they can be a particle or not.
  - if those two chars are not a particle, put back the second and test with
  the first one, that can be a particle or not.

To know if we have a particle we use the LUT; all possible particles are there.
We don't have to traverse the LUT completely because we could use the index
from parsing to search only for valid particles (order wise).

If what we read from istream doesn't constitute a particle, we put back it to
**istream** again. 

### Composing a Roman numeral

Composing a Roman numeral given an **int a** and the LUT is fairly simple; just
traverse the LUT asking if **a** can hold particle value, adding the particle
to the Roman numeral string and substracting the value from **a** if
affirmative.

    a is the int received
    roman = ""
    index = 0;
    while a != 0
        if a - LUT[index].value
            roman += LUT[index].particle
            a -= LUT[index].value
        ++index
    return roman

## The cheat

I want to have a **Roman\_int** constructor that receives a Roman numeral
string as argument and parses it to obtain the equivalent **int**. As we
already have a parsing function we can take advantage of it. The problem? The
parsing function works over an **istream**.

And here is where I cheat by introducing something not mentioned on the book;
the **stringstream**. As excuse I can say that its use is not different at all
from what we have done with regular **istream**s.

One point to take care of is that, in the case of the constructor, the string
parameter must be a well formed and unique Roman numeral, so we must assure
that **parse\_roman()** consumes the string completely and nothing else remains
on the **stringstream**. I've done that by reading a **string** from the
**stringstream** and test if its size equals 0.
