# 10.exercise.10.md

## Statement

Add a command **from x** to the calculator from Chapter 7 that makes it take
input from a file **x**. Add a command **to y** to the calculator that makes it
write its output (both standard output and error output) to file **y**. Write a
collection of test cases based on ideas from ยง7.3 and use that to test the
calculator. Discuss how you would use these commands for testing. 

## Analysis

### from Command

There are two aspects that confuse me about the from command.

The first is that, once the _from_ command is implemented it becomes a
legitimate command that can also appear on the file taken as input. How can we
manage the recursion that will likely appear? I find it as logical to have this
recursion as interesting. But the recursivity is also dangerous as deep as it
could dig on the stack and, in a production system, it must be controlled.

The second points to how the contents of the file invoked by the _from_ command
interacts with the current state (variables and constants previously defined)
of the calculator when they are executed. I think about various lanes:

  - Execute the contents from the file on an isolated and disposable state.
  - Make _tabula rasa_ and execute the contents from the file as there is no
    previous state.
  - Always mantain the state both before and after the execution of the
    contents from the file.

For me, the more attractive option is the third one, as it behaves like an
include (or a source command on bash, if you allow me to say so). It could
trigger errors if the previous state is not what is expected (documentation
will be fine then), but it could be a powerful feature.

Despite these thoughts there is always a path to simplify:

  - Define the _from_ command only as an interactive one and not consider it
    when it appears on a file.
  - Execute the contents from the file without worrying about the calculator's
    state.

### input Command
